plan.md, before:

# ConversationalAI4J Development Plan

## Current Status: Production-Ready Voice AI System with Browser UI ✅

**ConversationalAI4J** is a **complete voice-to-voice AI conversation system** with browser-based real-time interaction. Users can speak directly to an LLM through their browser and receive intelligent spoken responses.

## 🎯 **What's Working Right Now**

### ✅ Complete System (Ready for Production Use)

- **🎤 Real-time Voice Chat**: Browser WebSocket streaming with hold-to-talk interaction
- **🤖 AI Integration**: LangChain4j + Ollama (llama3.2:3b) for intelligent responses  
- **🔊 Speech Processing**: Complete voice-to-voice with sherpa-onnx (STT + TTS)
- **🐳 Docker Ready**: Complete containerized deployment with `docker-compose up`
- **🏗️ KISS Architecture**: Simplified, maintainable codebase following best practices
- **🛠️ Developer Experience**: One-command setup, comprehensive documentation, helper scripts

### 🎮 **User Experience**

```bash
# One command to start complete voice AI system
docker-compose up --build
# → Demo at http://localhost:8080
# → Click "Connect Voice Stream"
# → Hold microphone and speak
# → AI responds with synthesized speech
```

## 📋 **Project Architecture**

### Library Module (`conversational-ai4j-library/`)
- **Simple API**: `ConversationalAI.builder().withSpeech().build()`
- **LLM Integration**: LangChain4j 1.3.0 with Ollama
- **Speech APIs**: Text-to-speech interfaces (platform-agnostic)
- **KISS Design**: 2,297 lines across 16 files, focused responsibilities

### Demo Module (`conversational-ai4j-demo/`) 
- **WebSocket Handler**: Real-time voice streaming (`VoiceStreamHandler.java`)
- **Browser Interface**: Hold-to-talk voice controls (`conversation.html`)
- **REST API**: Traditional text chat + speech status endpoints
- **Spring Boot**: Clean MVC architecture with comprehensive testing

### Infrastructure
- **Simple Docker**: Single Dockerfile, efficient build
- **Ollama Service**: llama3.2:3b model with 8GB memory
- **Health Monitoring**: Built-in health checks and status endpoints

## 🚀 **Key Features**

### Voice Interaction
```javascript
// Browser: Hold microphone button → speak → release
// System: WebSocket → Speech recognition → LLM processing → TTS → Audio response
```

### Library API
```java
// Complete voice pipeline in 3 lines
ConversationalAI ai = ConversationalAI.builder()
    .withOllamaModel("llama3.2:3b")
    .withSpeech()  // Enables voice features
    .build();

byte[] audioResponse = ai.voiceChat(audioInput);
```

### Developer Experience
```bash
# Quick start options
./dev.sh start    # Docker environment
./dev.sh dev      # Development mode  
./dev.sh test     # Run all tests
./dev.sh reset    # Fix Docker issues
```

## 📊 **Development Phases (All Complete)**

### ✅ Phase 1-3: Foundation & Core AI *(Completed)*
- Multi-module Gradle project
- Spring Boot demo application  
- LangChain4j + Ollama integration
- Comprehensive testing (18/18 tests passing)

### ✅ Phase 4: Docker & Speech Integration *(Completed)*
- Docker Compose infrastructure
- Speech API interfaces and configuration
- Platform detection and fallback strategies

### ✅ Phase 5: Browser Voice Controls *(Completed)*
- WebSocket real-time voice streaming
- JavaScript audio recording/playback
- Hold-to-talk user interface
- Speech status monitoring

### ✅ Phase 6: KISS Architecture & DevEx *(Completed)*
- Code simplification and cleanup
- Developer experience improvements
- Comprehensive documentation
- Helper scripts and troubleshooting guides

## 🎯 **Current Status: Production Ready**

| Component | Status | Details |
|-----------|--------|---------|
| **Core Library** | ✅ Complete | Simple builder API, comprehensive speech support |
| **Voice UI** | ✅ Complete | Browser WebSocket streaming, hold-to-talk |
| **Docker Setup** | ✅ Complete | One-command deployment |
| **Testing** | ✅ Complete | All 18 tests passing |
| **Documentation** | ✅ Complete | README, troubleshooting, developer guides |
| **Architecture** | ✅ Excellent | KISS principles, maintainable codebase |

### 📈 **System Metrics**
- **Startup**: ~3 seconds for demo app
- **Voice Latency**: Real-time WebSocket streaming
- **Memory**: 8GB+ recommended for Ollama
- **Platform**: Cross-platform development, Linux production
- **Code Size**: ~2,300 lines total (library + demo)

## 🔮 **Future Enhancements** *(Optional)*

### Advanced Voice Features
- **Voice Activity Detection**: Smart recording start/stop
- **Multiple Languages**: Multi-lingual speech support  
- **Voice Customization**: Different AI voices/personalities
- **Conversation History**: Persistent voice conversation logs

### Production Scale
- **Kubernetes**: Production orchestration
- **Load Balancing**: Multiple AI model instances
- **Monitoring**: Voice processing performance metrics
- **Security**: Authentication, rate limiting, audio validation

### Developer Tools
- **CLI Tool**: Command-line interface for voice testing
- **Plugin System**: Extensible voice processing pipeline
- **Model Management**: Dynamic model switching and optimization

## 🏆 **Project Achievement**

**ConversationalAI4J** successfully delivers:

✅ **Complete Voice AI System** - Speak to LLM, get intelligent spoken responses  
✅ **Browser Integration** - Real-time WebSocket streaming with modern UI  
✅ **Production Ready** - Docker deployment, health monitoring, error handling  
✅ **Developer Friendly** - KISS architecture, comprehensive docs, helper scripts  
✅ **Platform Smart** - Works on Windows/macOS dev, Linux production  

## 🚀 **Getting Started**

```bash
# Clone and start
git clone https://github.com/SchulteDev/ConversationalAI4J.git
cd ConversationalAI4J
docker-compose up --build

# → Visit http://localhost:8080
# → Click "Connect Voice Stream"  
# → Hold microphone and talk to AI!
```

---

**Status: COMPLETE** - Production-ready voice AI system with browser interface! 🎤🤖🔊

*Ready for real-world deployment and further customization.*

Commit message:

feat: improve voice interaction stability, add Docker troubleshooting guide, enhance logging for STT/TTS debugging, and introduce new SpeechService tests

plan.md, after:

# ConversationalAI4J Development Plan

## Current Status: Voice in Docker - Debugging in Progress 🔧

**ConversationalAI4J** is a **complete voice-to-voice AI conversation system** with browser-based real-time interaction. Users can speak directly to an LLM through their browser and receive intelligent spoken responses.

## 🎯 **What's Working Right Now**

### ✅ Complete System (Ready for Production Use)

- **🎤 Real-time Voice Chat**: Browser WebSocket streaming with hold-to-talk interaction
- **🤖 AI Integration**: LangChain4j + Ollama (llama3.2:3b) for intelligent responses  
- **🔊 Speech Processing**: Complete voice-to-voice with sherpa-onnx (STT + TTS)
- **🐳 Docker Ready**: Complete containerized deployment with `docker-compose up`
- **🏗️ KISS Architecture**: Simplified, maintainable codebase following best practices
- **🛠️ Developer Experience**: One-command setup, comprehensive documentation, helper scripts

### 🎮 **User Experience**

```bash
# One command to start complete voice AI system
docker-compose up --build
# → Demo at http://localhost:8080
# → Click "Connect Voice Stream"
# → Hold microphone and speak
# → AI responds with synthesized speech
```

## 📋 **Project Architecture**

### Library Module (`conversational-ai4j-library/`)
- **Simple API**: `ConversationalAI.builder().withSpeech().build()`
- **LLM Integration**: LangChain4j 1.3.0 with Ollama
- **Speech APIs**: Text-to-speech interfaces (platform-agnostic)
- **KISS Design**: 2,297 lines across 16 files, focused responsibilities

### Demo Module (`conversational-ai4j-demo/`) 
- **WebSocket Handler**: Real-time voice streaming (`VoiceStreamHandler.java`)
- **Browser Interface**: Hold-to-talk voice controls (`conversation.html`)
- **REST API**: Traditional text chat + speech status endpoints
- **Spring Boot**: Clean MVC architecture with comprehensive testing

### Infrastructure
- **Simple Docker**: Single Dockerfile, efficient build
- **Ollama Service**: llama3.2:3b model with 8GB memory
- **Health Monitoring**: Built-in health checks and status endpoints

## 🚀 **Key Features**

### Voice Interaction
```javascript
// Browser: Hold microphone button → speak → release
// System: WebSocket → Speech recognition → LLM processing → TTS → Audio response
```

### Library API
```java
// Complete voice pipeline in 3 lines
ConversationalAI ai = ConversationalAI.builder()
    .withOllamaModel("llama3.2:3b")
    .withSpeech()  // Enables voice features
    .build();

byte[] audioResponse = ai.voiceChat(audioInput);
```

### Developer Experience
```bash
# Quick start options
./dev.sh start    # Docker environment
./dev.sh dev      # Development mode  
./dev.sh test     # Run all tests
./dev.sh reset    # Fix Docker issues
```

## 📊 **Development Phases (All Complete)**

### ✅ Phase 1-3: Foundation & Core AI *(Completed)*
- Multi-module Gradle project
- Spring Boot demo application  
- LangChain4j + Ollama integration
- Comprehensive testing (18/18 tests passing)

### ✅ Phase 4: Docker & Speech Integration *(Completed)*
- Docker Compose infrastructure
- Speech API interfaces and configuration
- Platform detection and fallback strategies

### ✅ Phase 5: Browser Voice Controls *(Completed)*
- WebSocket real-time voice streaming
- JavaScript audio recording/playback
- Hold-to-talk user interface
- Speech status monitoring

### ✅ Phase 6: KISS Architecture & DevEx *(Completed)*
- Code simplification and cleanup
- Developer experience improvements
- Comprehensive documentation
- Helper scripts and troubleshooting guides

## 🎯 Current Focus: Docker Voice Debugging

| Component | Status | Details |
|-----------|--------|---------|
| **Core Library** | ✅ Complete | Simple builder API, comprehensive speech support |
| **Voice UI** | ✅ Complete | Browser WebSocket streaming, hold-to-talk |
| **Docker Setup** | ✅ Complete | One-command deployment |
| **Testing** | ✅ Complete | All 18 tests passing |
| **Documentation** | ✅ Complete | README, troubleshooting, developer guides |
| **Architecture** | ✅ Excellent | KISS principles, maintainable codebase |

### 📈 **System Metrics**
- **Startup**: ~3 seconds for demo app
- **Voice Latency**: Real-time WebSocket streaming
- **Memory**: 8GB+ recommended for Ollama
- **Platform**: Cross-platform development, Linux production
- **Code Size**: ~2,300 lines total (library + demo)

## 🔮 **Future Enhancements** *(Optional)*

### Advanced Voice Features
- **Voice Activity Detection**: Smart recording start/stop
- **Multiple Languages**: Multi-lingual speech support  
- **Voice Customization**: Different AI voices/personalities
- **Conversation History**: Persistent voice conversation logs

### Production Scale
- **Kubernetes**: Production orchestration
- **Load Balancing**: Multiple AI model instances
- **Monitoring**: Voice processing performance metrics
- **Security**: Authentication, rate limiting, audio validation

### Developer Tools
- **CLI Tool**: Command-line interface for voice testing
- **Plugin System**: Extensible voice processing pipeline
- **Model Management**: Dynamic model switching and optimization

## 🏆 **Project Achievement**

**ConversationalAI4J** successfully delivers:

✅ **Complete Voice AI System** - Speak to LLM, get intelligent spoken responses  
✅ **Browser Integration** - Real-time WebSocket streaming with modern UI  
✅ **Production Ready** - Docker deployment, health monitoring, error handling  
✅ **Developer Friendly** - KISS architecture, comprehensive docs, helper scripts  
✅ **Platform Smart** - Works on Windows/macOS dev, Linux production  

## 🚀 **Getting Started**

```bash
# Clone and start
git clone https://github.com/SchulteDev/ConversationalAI4J.git
cd ConversationalAI4J
docker-compose up --build

# → Visit http://localhost:8080
# → Click "Connect Voice Stream"  
# → Hold microphone and talk to AI!
```

---

**Status: IN PROGRESS** - Docker voice debugging underway. See README Troubleshooting for exactly which logs to capture. Core features and tests pass; enhanced logging added to help isolate STT normalization and TTS playback in Docker.

Next steps:
- Re-run docker-compose up --build
- Open http://localhost:8080 → Connect Voice Stream → hold-to-talk
- Share the demo container logs from “Started recording …” to “complete” and your browser console [voice] logs

This will allow us to pinpoint whether the issue is in recording, normalization (ffmpeg), STT model/decoding, or TTS synthesis/playback.
